>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JANUARY 10:
THE UNITED STATES FLIES A B-52
BOMBER OVER SOUTH KOREA IN A
"DEMONSTRATION OF COMMITMENT" TO
ITS ALLY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A LOOK
AT THE OLDEST VOLUNTARY SCHOOL
DESEGREGATION PROGRAM IN THE
COUNTRY.
>> THAT'S THE KEY, THAT IT'S
VOLUNTARY.
THAT THE SUBURBAN DISTRICTS THAT
ARE PARTICIPATING ARE DOING SO
BECAUSE THEY SEE THE BENEFIT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, THE UNITED
STATES CONSIDERS ENDING A
PROGRAM THAT ENCOURAGES CUBAN
DOCTORS TO DEFECT.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES HAS MADE A
SHOW OF FORCE TO BOLSTER SOUTH
KOREA, FIVE DAYS AFTER WHAT
NORTH KOREA CLAIMED WAS ITS
FIRST HYDROGEN BOMB TEST,
WHICH HAS YET TO BE CONFIRMED.
TODAY, THE U.S. AIR FORCE FLEW A
NUCLEAR-CAPABLE B-52 BOMBER
BASED IN GUAM ON A LOW-LEVEL
FLIGHT OVER SOUTH KOREAN AIR
SPACE.
IT WAS ESCORTED BY AMERICAN
F-16s BASED IN SOUTH KOREA AND
SOUTH KOREAN FIGHTER JETS.
THE U.S. MILITARY CALLS THE
EXERCISE A DEMONSTRATION OF
COMMITMENT TO ITS ALLY, SOUTH
KOREA.
>> THE UNITED STATES REMAINS
STEADFAST IN ITS COMMITMENT TO
THE DEFENSE OF THE REPUBLIC OF
KOREA AND MAINTAINING THE
STABILITY ON THE KOREAN
PENINSULA TO INCLUDE EXTENDED
DETERRENCE PROVIDED BY OUR
CONVENTIONAL FORCES AND OUR
NUCLEAR UMBRELLA.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER VISITING
HIS MILITARY HEADQUARTERS, NORTH
KOREAN LEADER KIM JONG-UN SAID
LAST WEEK'S TEST WAS A SELF
DEFENSIVE STEP FROM, QUOTE, "THE
DANGER OF NUCLEAR WAR CAUSED BY
THE U.S.-LED IMPERIALISTS."
MEXICAN AUTHORITIES WANT TO
QUESTION ACTOR SEAN PENN ABOUT
HIS STEALTH INTERVIEW WITH
MEXICAN DRUG CARTEL LEADER
JOAQUIN "EL CHAPO" GUZMAN.
"ROLLING STONE" MAGAZINE
PUBLISHED PENN'S ARTICLE LATE
YESTERDAY ABOUT HIS VISIT TO ONE
OF GUZMAN'S HIDEOUTS IN OCTOBER,
THREE MONTHS AFTER GUZMAN HAD
ESCAPED FROM PRISON.
IN A VIDEO ANSWERING QUESTIONS
SUBMITTED BY PENN AFTER THE
VISIT, GUZMAN DENIED HE WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE HIGH LEVEL
OF DRUG ADDICTION IN THE WORLD.
>> (translated): NO, THAT IS
FALSE, BECAUSE THE DAY I DON'T
EXIST, IT'S NOT GOING TO
DECREASE IN ANY WAY AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. HAS
ASKED MEXICO, WHICH RE-CAPTURED
GUZMAN FRIDAY, TO EXTRADITE HIM
TO FACE U.S. CHARGES FOR
TRAFFICKING HEROIN, COCAINE,
MARIJUANA, AND METHAMPHETAMINE.
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S CHIEF OF STAFF
SAID TODAY GUZMAN IS PARTLY
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE HEROIN
EPIDEMIC ACROSS THE U.S.
>> I WAS APPALLED BY HIS
BRAGGING TO THE INTERVIEWERS IN
"ROLLING STONE" THAT HE MOVES
MORE HEROIN THAN ANYBODY IN THE
WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: FRANCE IS
COMMEMORATING THE VICTIMS OF ALL
OF LAST YEAR'S TERRORIST ATTACKS
THAT KILLED ALMOST 150 PEOPLE.
FRENCH PRESIDENT FRANCOIS
HOLLANDE AND THE MAYOR OF PARIS
UNVEILED A PLAQUE IN MEMORY OF
THE VICTIMS AT THE CEREMONY
TODAY IN THE CITY'S PLACE DE LA
REPUBLIQUE.
LAST WEEK MARKED ONE YEAR SINCE
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS KILLED 16
PEOPLE IN THE OFFICES OF THE
MAGAZINE "CHARLIE HEBDO" AND IN
A KOSHER MARKET.
LAST NOVEMBER 13TH, TERRORISTS
AFFILIATED WITH THE ISLAMIC
MILITANT GROUP ISIS KILLED 130
PEOPLE IN ATTACKS ON PARIS CAFES
AND A CONCERT HALL.
ONE SUSPECT DIRECTLY INVOLVED
REMAINS AT LARGE.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE PAST
DECADE, THE UNITED STATES HAS
ENCOURAGED CUBAN DOCTORS AND
NURSES WORKING OUTSIDE CUBA TO
DEFECT TO THE UNITED STATES.
SINCE 2006, THE U.S. HAS
APPROVED MORE THAN 7,000
APPLICATIONS, ACCORDING TO THE
STATE DEPARTMENT AND DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY.
NOW, THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS
CONSIDERING ENDING THE PROGRAM
AS PART OF THE NORMALIZATION OF
U.S.-CUBAN RELATIONS.
REUTERS WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENT JEFF MASON FIRST
REPORTED THE STORY AND JOINS ME
NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
HOW DID THE PROGRAM WORK, HOW
DID WE GET 7,000 APPLICANTS IN
THE SYSTEM?
>> WELL, THE PROGRAM BASICALLY
WORKS BY ALLOWING CUBAN DOCTORS
WHO ARE OVERSEAS BECAUSE OF
INCENTIVE BY THE GOVERNMENT TO
APPLY AT U.S. EMBASSIES FOR
ENTRY INTO THE UNITED STATES.
AND THE STATE DEPARTMENT GIVES
THESE EMBASSIES AND U.S.
OFFICIALS ABROAD PRETTY WIDE
LATITUDE TO APPROVE THOSE
APPLICATIONS AND TO GET THOSE
APPLICATIONS GOING.
SO IT'S A PROGRAM THAT-- IS
ACTUALLY VERY PROUD OF BECAUSE
IT SENDS, OR IT IS BASICALLY
EXPORTING THEIR MEDICAL
PROFESSIONALS ABROAD TO HELP IN
PLACES THAT REALLY NEED IT.
THEY ALSO EARN MONEY FROM DOING
THAT.
SO THEY CERTAINLY, THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT CERTAINLY SAW IT AS A
PRETTY BIG SLAP IN THE FACE.
>> Sreenivasan: I REMEMBER
HEARING ABOUT HOW MANY CUBAN
DOCTORS WERE THERE IN AFRICA TO
TREAT EBOLA.
ALMOST EVERY NATURAL DISASTER
THAT HAPPENS AROUND THE WORLD,
YOU ALWAYS HEAR OF A LARGE
NUMBER OF CUBAN DOCTORS THAT ARE
THERE.
>> YEAH, THAT'S RIGHT.
THE CUBAN DOCTORS ARE KNOWN FOR
BRINGING BEING SKILLFUL MEDICAL
PROFESSIONALS AND SOMETHING THE
CUBANS ARE PROUD OF.
SO SORT OF POACHING THEM AWAY
INTO THE UNITED STATES WAS ONE
OF THE MANY THORNS IN THE SIDE,
IN THAT RELATIONSHIP BOTH FOR
CUBAN-- CUBA AND AMONG MANY THAT
ARE THORNS IN THE SIDE OF THE
UNITED STATES AS WELL.
>> SOME OF THE DOCK TORS THAT
WERE DEFECTING ALSO COMPLAINED
ABOUT THE FACT THAT THEY WEREN'T
GETTING PAID WHAT THESE FOREIGN
COUNTRIES WAS PAYING CUBAN.
>> RIGHT, I MEAN IT WAS A
MONEYMAKER FOR CUBA.
ONE OF THE EXAMPLES IS THEY
SEND-- CUBA SENDS A LOT OF
MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS TO
VENEZUELA IN EXCHANGE FOR OIL.
AND THE CUBAN DOCTORS
THEMSELVES, THOUGH THEY WERE
PROBABLY MAKING A MORE
COMPETITIVE SALARY THAN THEY
WERE BACK AT HOME, THEY WERE
NOT TAKING IN ALL THE REVENUE
THAT THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT WAS
TAKING FROM SENDING THOSE PEOPLE
ABROAD.
SO THAT WAS INDEED ONE OF THEIR
COMPLAINTS AND ONE OF THE
REASONS THAT THEY TOOK UP THIS
OPPORTUNITY FROM THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: AS WE START
NORMALIZING RELATIONS, HAS THAT
ENCOURAGED PEOPLE TO SAY YOU
KNOW WHAT, LET'S GO AHEAD AND
PUT IN OUR APPLICATIONS NOW,
CAUSE ALMOST A SURGE IN THE LAST
YEAR.
OR WHAT IS THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT
DOING ABOUT THIS?
>> THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT ACTUALLY
HAS CLAMPED DOWN ON THE NUMBER
OF DOCTORS THAT THEY ALLOW TO
LEAVE CUBA AND TO PARTICIPATE IN
THESE PROGRAM AS BROAD.
AND THAT IS ACTUALLY SOMETHING
THAT LEAD THE UNITED STATES,
WHICH AS I REPORTED, HAS PUT
THIS PROGRAM UNDER REVIEW.
THAT IS BEING, INCLUDED IN PART
OF THAT HE ARE VIEW RIGHT NOW.
SO THE CUBANS HAVE TAKEN SOME
ACTION TO REDUCE THOSE NUMBERS
BECAUSE OF THE POACHING AND
BECAUSE OF THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
LEAVING.
>> REUTERS WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENT JEFF MASON,
THANKS.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE THAN 60
YEARS AFTER THE SUPREME COURT
DECLARED "SEPARATE BUT EQUAL"
SCHOOLS UNCONSTITUTIONAL, THE
UNITED STATES IS STILL A LONG
WAY FROM FULLY INTEGRATED PUBLIC
SCHOOLS.
RACIAL ISOLATION REMAINS A
PROBLEM NOT ONLY IN THE SOUTHERN
STATES WHERE SEGREGATION WAS
ONCE THE NORM, BUT ALSO IN
STATES LIKE NEW YORK.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE U.C.L.A. CIVIL
RIGHTS PROJECT HAS FOUND NEW
YORK STATE HAS THE HIGHEST
CONCENTRATION OF BLACK AND
LATINO KIDS IN SCHOOLS THAT ARE
LESS THAN 10% WHITE, SCHOOLS
THAT ARE OFTEN IN LOW-INCOME
URBAN AREAS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE LOOK AT A VOLUNTARY
INTEGRATION PROGRAM IN
ROCHESTER, NEW YORK, WHERE
SUBURBAN COMMUNITIES HAVE
WELCOMED CITY KIDS TO THEIR
SCHOOLS SINCE THE 1960s.
THIS STORY IS PART OF "CHASING
THE DREAM," OUR CONTINUING
COVERAGE OF POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE SUBURBS
OF ROCHESTER, NEW YORK, PARENTS
AND STUDENTS PACK THE GYM FOR A
VARSITY HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL
GAME.
SENIOR TY'REEK SIZER, NUMBER 3,
IS A STARTING GUARD AND AN
HONOR ROLL STUDENT AT
IRONDEQUOIT HIGH.
HE'S ATTENDED SCHOOLS IN WEST
IRONDEQUOIT SINCE SECOND GRADE
AND SAYS HE FEELS AT HOME, BUT
HE DOESN'T LIVE IN THE SCHOOL
DISTRICT.
SINCE HE WAS SEVEN YEARS OLD,
SIZER HAS TRAVELED FROM HIS
FAMILY'S HOME IN ROCHESTER, A 45
MINUTE BUS RIDE EACH WAY TO
SCHOOL.
HE'S PART OF URBAN-SUBURBAN, THE
OLDEST VOLUNTARY SCHOOL
DESEGREGATION PROGRAM IN THE
COUNTRY.
>> AT FIRST, I DIDN'T REALIZE
THAT I WAS COMING INTO THIS
OPPORTUNITY.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S BECOME AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR 700 MINORITY
STUDENTS FROM ROCHESTER TO
ATTEND SCHOOLS IN THE PRIMARILY
WHITE SUBURBS, WHERE THE SCHOOLS
ARE CONSISTENTLY RATED HIGHER-
PERFORMING.
>> I FEEL LIKE I WOULD HAVE BEEN
GOOD STAYING IN THE CITY SCHOOL
DISTRICT, BUT I DON'T FEEL LIKE
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN AS BENEFICIAL
AS COMING HERE.
WE HAVE BASICALLY THE BEST OF
THE BEST HERE, SO YOU HAVE A LOT
OF RESOURCES.
>> Sreenivasan: AND TY'REEK HAS
THRIVED: TAKING ADVANCED
PLACEMENT CLASSES, WINNING
NATIONAL AWARDS WITH THE
SCHOOL'S BUSINESS CLUB, AND
APPLYING TO COLLEGE FOR NEXT
YEAR.
>> I THINK THE IMPACT IS
IMMEASURABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: THERESA WOODSON
IS THE ADMINISTRATOR OF
ROCHESTER'S URBAN-SUBURBAN
PROGRAM.
IT STARTED 51 YEARS AGO, IN
1965, TO INCREASE RACIAL
INTEGRATION IN THE REGION.
WEST IRONDEQUOIT WAS THE FIRST
DISTRICT TO SIGN UP, ACCEPTING
24 MINORITY STUDENTS FROM THE
INNER CITY THAT FIRST YEAR.
THIS YEAR, THE DISTRICT HAS 137
STUDENTS FROM THE CITY.
OVERALL, IN WEST IRONDEQUOIT,
THE STUDENTS ARE 74% WHITE, AND
27% ARE ECONOMICALLY
DISADVANTAGED, QUALIFYING FOR
ASSISTANCE SUCH AS FREE OR
REDUCED PRICE LUNCH.
BY CONTRAST, IN THE CITY OF
ROCHESTER, 10% OF THE STUDENTS
ARE WHITE, AND 91% ARE
ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED.
IT ISN'T EASY FOR A CITY KID TO
GET INTO A DISTRICT LIKE WEST
IRONDEQUOIT.
ONLY ABOUT 10 TO 15% OF KIDS WHO
APPLY THROUGH URBAN-SUBURBAN ARE
ACCEPTED.
>> THE PROGRAM IS NOT BASED ON
QUOTAS OR LOTTERY OR FIRST-COME
FIRST-SERVED.
THERE HAS TO BE SPACE AVAILABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: BESIDES A
STUDENT'S ACADEMIC ABILITY,
PARENTAL ENGAGEMENT IS A KEY
FACTOR FOR ADMISSION.
>> THEIR LEVEL OF COMMITMENT,
THEIR LEVEL OF PARTICIPATION IS
REALLY THE GLUE THAT HOLDS ALL
THIS TOGETHER ONCE THEIR CHILD
IS SELECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: VICTORIA SIZER
IS TY'REEK'S MOTHER.
SHE WANTED SOMETHING BETTER FOR
TY'REEK AFTER HER OLDEST
DAUGHTER ATTENDED CITY SCHOOLS.
>> THE COMMUNICATION WASN'T
REALLY THERE.
WHEN MY DAUGHTER WAS GOING TO
12th GRADE, THE COUNSELOR
DIDN'T, I DIDN'T HEAR ANYTHING
ABOUT COLLEGES OR HOW THE
PROCESS STARTS ABOUT HER GOING
TO COLLEGES.
AND IT WAS SO FRUSTRATING.
I'M LIKE, THERE NEEDS TO BE A
CHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHE HEARD ABOUT
URBAN-SUBURBAN FROM ANOTHER
PARENT AND APPLIED.
IT TOOK HER TWO YEARS TO GET
TY'REEK IN, AND SENDING HER
YOUNG CHILD TO A SCHOOL FAR AWAY
WAS NERVE WRACKING.
>> IT WAS JUST A SCARY PROCESS
GOING, BECAUSE WE'RE AFRICAN
AMERICAN, IS HE GOING TO BE
OKAY?
IS HE GOING TO TRANSITION OKAY?
ARE THEY GOING TO TREAT HIM
RIGHT?
ALL THAT WAS GOING THROUGH MY
MIND.
BUT THAT WAS A CHANCE I WAS
GOING TO TAKE.
BUT WHEN HE GOT TO THE SCHOOL,
AND I FELT LIKE HE WAS SAFE, AND
IT WAS A WELCOMING COMMUNITY, IT
WAS LIKE SO RELIEVING.
>> Sreenivasan: SHE FOUND
IMMEDIATE ACCEPTANCE WHEN
ANOTHER MOTHER CALLED HER EARLY
IN TY'REEK'S FIRST YEAR.
>> IT WAS LIKE, WE WANT TO
INVITE TY'REEK OVER FOR A
PLAYDATE.
WHICH I'M LIKE, "A PLAY DATE?
WHAT IS A PLAY DATE?"
SHE WAS LIKE, "OH, HE COULD COME
OVER AND SPEND SOME TIME WITH
HER SON."
>> Sreenivasan: FOR VICTORIA,
URBAN-SUBURBAN PROVIDED AN
OPPORTUNITY SHE COULDN'T, WHILE
RAISING FIVE CHILDREN AND
WORKING AS A NURSE'S AIDE.
ADMINISTRATOR THERESA WOODSON
SAYS ONE OF SECRETS TO THE
PROGRAM'S SUCCESS IS THAT IT WAS
NOT IMPOSED ON ROCHESTER BY
POLITICIANS OR JUDGES.
THE SUBURBS CHOSE THIS APPROACH.
>> THAT'S THE KEY FOR US, THAT,
YOU KNOW, THAT IT'S VOLUNTARY.
NO COURT MANDATES.
THAT THE SUBURBAN DISTRICTS THAT
ARE PARTICIPATING ARE DOING SO
BECAUSE THEY SEE THE BENEFIT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BENEFIT OF
INCREASING THEIR OWN DIVERSITY
AT NO ADDITIONAL COST: STATE
FUNDING FOLLOWS THE STUDENT TO
THE SUBURBS AND PICKS UP THE TAB
FOR BUSING.
STILL, FOR MOST OF THE PAST 50
YEARS, THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN
MODEST IN SCOPE WITH ONLY SIX OF
THE 17 SUBURBAN DISTRICTS
SURROUNDING ROCHESTER TAKING
PART.
WEST IRONDEQUOIT SCHOOL DISTRICT
SUPERINTENDENT JEFF CRANE SAYS
THERE'S ALWAYS BEEN A SMALL, BUT
VOCAL OPPOSITION TO URBAN-
SUBURBAN.
>> I WILL GET A CALL AT LEAST
ONE OR TWO CALLS THAT ARE
AGAINST THIS PROGRAM EACH YEAR,
AND SOMETIMES THAT'S HARD TO
HEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: AROUND THE 50th
ANNIVERSARY LAST YEAR, OFFICIALS
PUSHED TO EXPAND THE PROGRAM.
IN THE TOWN OF SPENCERPORT, WEST
OF ROCHESTER, PUBLIC HEARINGS
WERE DIVISIVE.
A COMMON COMPLAINT WAS THAT ONLY
CHILDREN OF COLOR WERE ELIGIBLE.
>> I'M ALSO NOT HAPPY THAT WE
CAN'T SEEM TO COME UP WITH SOME
SORT OF EQUITABLE SOLUTION TO
BEING ABLE TO HELP PEOPLE IN
THIS PROGRAM WITHOUT EXCLUDING
OTHER PEOPLE.
I'M TALKING ABOUT EXCLUDING
CAUCASIANS FROM THIS PROGRAM.
THERE'S NO REASON THAT YOU
SHOULD EXCLUDE THOSE PEOPLE FROM
THE CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT AS
WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: CRANE SAYS THE
DEBATE FORCED SCHOOL OFFICIALS
TO UPDATE THEIR ADMISSION
CRITERIA TO FOCUS ON POVERTY,
NOT ONLY RACE, AND STARTING NEXT
SCHOOL YEAR URBAN-SUBURBAN WILL
BE OPEN TO ANY STUDENT IN
ROCHESTER, REGARDLESS OF
ETHNICITY.
>> WE CHANGED OUR MISSION
STATEMENT, NOT ONLY TO DECREASE
VOLUNTARILY RACIAL ISOLATION,
BUT ALSO TO HELP DECONCENTRATE
POVERTY.
BY DOING THAT, WE TOOK AWAY SOME
OF THE POINTED ARGUMENTS THAT
THE PROGRAM WAS RACIST IN
SETTING ABOUT A RACIAL ISOLATION
PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: FIVE NEW
DISTRICTS DID OPT TO JOIN URBAN-
SUBURBAN LAST YEAR, INCLUDING
SPENCERPORT, WHERE THE SCHOOL
BOARD UNANIMOUSLY APPROVED
JOINING DESPITE THE CONTROVERSY.
SIXTH GRADER ZAVANNAH ALVAREZ IS
ONE OF 17 NEW STUDENTS THERE.
HER PARENTS, RAMON AND ITZA
ALVAREZ, SAY THE DIVISIVENESS
OVER THE PROGRAM IN SPENCERPORT
HAS NOT AFFECTED HOW THEIR
DAUGHTER HAS BEEN TREATED.
>> WHEN I TALK TO THE COUNSELOR,
SHE DOESN'T SEE HER JUST LIKE
THIS KID THAT CAME FROM THE
CITY.
SHE'S PART OF HER, YOU KNOW, ONE
OF HER KIDS.
AND SHE TALKS TO HER LIKE ONE OF
HER KIDS.
IF YOU ARE TREATING MY DAUGHTER
LIKE THAT, I'M ALL FOR IT.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE FIRST FEW
MONTHS, THE ALVAREZ'S SAY
ZAVANNAH'S GETTING MORE RIGOROUS
INSTRUCTION.
>> SHE TAKES MATH TWICE, I
BELIEVE, IN A DAY.
BEFORE IT WAS JUST ONCE.
SO NOW SHE'S GETTING THAT
EXTRA...
>> ...THAT EXTRA HELP SHE NEEDS.
>> AND SHE'S DOING WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR ZAVANNAH AND
HER OLDER BROTHER CHRISTIAN, WHO
ATTENDS AN URBAN-SUBURBAN
PROGRAM IN ANOTHER DISTRICT,
THERE'S BEEN A BIG ADJUSTMENT TO
A GRUELING SCHEDULE.
>> THE KIDS WAKE UP AT 4:30 IN
THE MORNING TO GET READY, TO BE
OUT ON THE BUS BY 6:00.
IT'S A LONG BUS RIDE.
BUT YOU KNOW WHAT, I LIKE IT,
BECAUSE IT TEACHES THEM
RESPONSIBILITY.
AND WHEN THEY GET OLDER AND THEY
GET A JOB, THEIR CAREERS,
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO WAKE UP
EARLY ANYWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: EVEN IN ITS 51st
YEAR, ROCHESTER'S URBAN-SUBURBAN
PROGRAM SERVES ONLY 700 KIDS IN
A DISTRICT OF NEARLY 30,000.
IT'S THE SMALLEST OF THE EIGHT
INTERDISTRICT TRANSFER PROGRAMS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY AND ABOUT
40,000 STUDENTS PARTICIPATE.
THE LARGEST IS HARTFORD,
CONNECTICUT WITH 19,000 KIDS.
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER
EDUCATION PROFESSOR KARA
FINNIGAN SAYS WHILE RESEARCH ON
THESE PROGRAMS IS LIMITED, IT
HAS SHOWN POSITIVE ACADEMIC AND
SOCIAL BENEFITS.
>> IT'S REALLY ONE OF THE ONLY
POLICY TOOLS WE HAVE RIGHT NOW.
THIS KIND OF PROGRAM THAT ALLOWS
KIDS TO CROSS DISTRICT
BOUNDARIES WHETHER IT'S THROUGH
URBAN-SUBURBAN KIND OF PROGRAM
OR THROUGH INTERDISTRICT
MAGNETS.
THESE ARE THE ONLY OPPORTUNITIES
WE HAVE TO REALLY ADDRESS SOME
OF THE INEQUITIES AROUND
OPPORTUNITY AND OUTCOMES BECAUSE
OF THE BOUNDARIES.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ROCHESTER
AREA REMAINS RACIALLY ISOLATED.
THE PERCENT OF SCHOOLS THAT ARE
INTENSELY-SEGREGATED-- MORE THAN
90% MINORITY-- GREW MORE THAN
FIVEFOLD OVER THE LAST 20 YEARS.
>> I THINK THAT THERE PROBABLY
ARE WAYS THAT THE PROGRAM COULD
GROW, BUT IT'S NEVER GOING TO
SOLVE THE PROBLEMS IN ROCHESTER.
REALLY YOU NEED INVESTMENT IN
PLACES TO MAKE THEM THRIVE.
AND YOU NEED OPPORTUNITIES
WITHIN THE CITY THAT KIDS FROM
THE SUBURBS WILL WANT TO GO TO
JUST AS MUCH, BECAUSE THEY'RE
WONDERFUL OPPORTUNITIES IN
WHATEVER PROGRAMS THEY OFFER.
>> Sreenivasan: ROCHESTER
TEACHERS' UNION PRESIDENT ADAM
URBANSKI SUPPORTS THE IDEA
BEHIND URBAN-SUBURBAN BUT SAYS
THE PROGRAM CHERRY PICKS THE
HIGHEST ACHIEVING CITY KIDS AND
HAS NOT LED TO BROADER CHANGES.
>> UNWITTINGLY, THIS IS
CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELAY OF THE
REAL SOLUTION.
AND, THEREFORE TO THE WIDENING
GULF BETWEEN THE HAVES AND THE
HAVE-NOTS.
I WANT US TO DO THINGS THAT CAN
BE SCALED UP AND NOT HAVE
PROGRAMS THAT END UP AS A
BOUTIQUE EXCEPTION TO THE SAD
NORM.
>> NONE OF US INVOLVED IN THIS
PROGRAM HAVE EVER SAID TO ANYONE
THIS IS THE ANSWER.
THIS IS JUST ONE OF THE WAYS IN
WHICH WE START TO DEAL, AS A
SOCIETY, WITH THE ISSUES WE'RE
ALL FACED WITH.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE
ADDITION OF NEW DISTRICTS,
ROCHESTER URBAN-SUBURBAN IS
EXPECTING TO INCREASE ITS
ENROLLMENTS IN THE COMING YEARS.
THIS COMING FALL THE PROGRAM
WILL GO BOTH WAYS, AND SEND KIDS
FROM THE SUBURBS TO SELECT CITY
SCHOOLS.
>> I JUST THINK AS A COUNTY AS A
WHOLE, THAT WE'RE ALL
INTERCONNECTED, AND I THINK WHEN
WE'RE WORKING IN UNISON, AND
WE'RE ROWING IN THE SAME
DIRECTION, TO BENEFIT ALL KIDS,
REGARDLESS OF WHERE THEIR
ADDRESS IS, I THINK THAT'S THE
KEY.
>> Sreenivasan: AT 17, TY'REEK
SIZER NO LONGER TAKES THE BUS TO
SCHOOL, INSTEAD DRIVING A FAMILY
CAR THE SIX-AND-A-HALF MILES
FROM HOME WITH HIS YOUNGER
BROTHER AND FRIENDS.
AFTER A DECADE GOING TO SCHOOL
IN WEST IRONDEQUOIT, TY'REEK
BELIEVES BEING IN A MORE DIVERSE
ENVIRONMENT WILL PAY OFF.
>> IT DOES GET A LITTLE
CHALLENGING KNOWING THAT YOU'RE
PROBABLY LIKE THE ONLY AFRICAN-
AMERICAN IN YOUR CLASS, BUT AT
THE END OF THE DAY, I FEEL LIKE
THIS PREPARES ME BETTER FOR
COLLEGE.
>> Sreenivasan: HIS FIRST CHOICE
IS SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY, WHERE
AFRICAN AMERICANS MAKE UP ABOUT
EIGHT PERCENT OF THE STUDENT
BODY.
WHAT HAPPENS TO STUDENTS GROWING
UP IN MOSTLY SEGREGATED INNER-
CITY SCHOOLS?
WATCH OUR "RACE MATTERS"
CONVERSATION WITH PEDRO NOGUERA
ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour
WHEN CHINA'S STOCK MARKET
PLUNGED 10% LAST WEEK, IT HAD
RIPPLE EFFECTS AROUND THE WORLD.
IN THE U.S., THE DOW JONES
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE DROPPED MORE
THAN 1,000 POINTS, LOSING 6% OF
ITS VALUE.
CHINA STILL HAS THE WORLD'S
SECOND LARGEST ECONOMY, BUT ITS
CURRENCY HAS BEEN DEVALUED, AND
IT APPEARS TO BE EXPERIENCING A
REAL ESTATE BUBBLE.
THE SIGNS OF A FINANCIAL CRISIS
ARE IN SOME WAYS REMINISCENT OF
THE CONDITIONS IN THE U.S. EIGHT
YEARS AGO.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE WITH MARILYN
GEEWAX, THE SENIOR BUSINESS
EDITOR FOR NATIONAL PUBLIC
RADIO, TO DISCUSS CHINA'S
ECONOMIC WOES AND THEIR EFFECT
ON THE U.S.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S A
CONVERSATION JUDY WOODRUFF HAD
WITH TOM PER EASY ABOUT A STRONG
JOBS REPORT NUMBER AND REALLY A
SERIES OF LONG, STRONG JOBS
REPORTS NUMBERS.
SO WE HAVE SOME REASONS TO BE
OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE U.S.
ECONOMY.
BUT THEN HERE WAS THE LAST WEEK
WHERE OUR STOCK MARKET RESPONDED
SO CLOSELY TO CHINA.
>> RIGHT, THAT'S REALLY THE
QUESTION THAT EVERYONE IS TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT.
IS THE U.S. ECONOMY, THE REAL
ECONOMY, THE PEOPLE WHO ARE JUST
DOING THEIR JOBS EVERY DAY IN
THE UNITED STATES, THE
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS WHO ARE
BUILDING NEW HOMES, ARE THOSE
JOBS ENOUGH TO KEEP OUR COUNTRY
MOVING FORWARD.
WE'VE GOT ALMOST 300,000 NEW
JOBS IN DECEMBER.
THAT'S INCREDIBLY STRONG.
WE'VE HAD REALLY A GOOD RUN AND
IT LOOKS LIKE WAGES ARE POISED
TO START TO INCH UP.
SO MAYBE EVERYTHING'S FINE.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, THERE IS
THIS FEAR OF CONTAGION, THAT IS
WHAT HAPPENING IN CHINA WILL END
UP REVERBERATING OUT ACROSS THE
WORLD, THAT IT IS DISRUPTING
MARKETS AND LOOK WHAT HAPPENED
TO OUR STOCK MARKET THIS PAST
WEEK WAS TERRIBLE.
SO IT'S VERY UNCHARTERED.
PEOPLE DON'T KNOW WHAT TO MAKE
OF ALL OF THIS.
BECAUSE CHINA HAS NEVER BEEN SO
LARGE AND SO POWERFUL BEFORE.
AND NOW ALL OF A SUDDEN THEY ARE
HAVING ALL THESE PROBLEMS AND
WITH THEIR CURRENCY, ABOUT THEIR
STOCK PRICES.
AND REALLY, IT'S JUST UNKNOWN
WHETHER OR NOT THAT'S GOING TO
DERAIL US IN SOME WAY OR NOT.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW THIS, THE
PRECONDITIONS FOR OUR FINANCIAL
CRISIS WERE HOUSING
BUBBLE-- BUBBLE BASED ON
SOMETIMES PREDATORY LENDING BUT
PEOPLE WERE BUYING THINGS THAT
THEY COULDN'T AFFORD.
AND THAT ALSO HAPPENED IN CHINA.
SO ARE THEY SEEING THE RIPPLE
EFFECTS OF THAT?
>> IS THIS ALL ONE BIG GIANT
CRISIS?
WE'RE SORT OF TALKING ABOUT IT
LIKE TWO DIFFERENT THINGS, THAT
THERE WAS SOMETHING THAT
HAPPENED IN THE UNITED STATES IN
200, 8, THE AND A SEPARATE THING
HAPPENS IN CHINA.
BUT ACTUALLY MAYBE IT'S ALL PART
OF THE SAME BIG TAPESTRY WHERE
YOU STARTED OUT IN THE UNITED
STATES WITH A FINANCIAL CRISIS
THAT WAS TIED TO TOO MUCH
SPENDING ON HOUSING, TOO MANY
PEOPLE BORROWED TOO MUCH MONEY
AND THEN THAT BUBBLE BURST.
AND THAT WAS REALLY BAD.
IT SET OFF A TERRIBLE GLOBAL
RECESSION.
BUT THEN IT MOVED OVER TO EUROPE
WHERE THE PROBLEM REALLY WAS
MORE SOVEREIGN DEBT, WHERE
COUNTRIES HAD BORROWED TOO MUCH,
LIKE GREECE.
SO YOU HAD A BIG DISRUPTION OVER
THERE THAT HURT THE EUROPEAN
ECONOMY AND NOW YOU'RE
MOVING OVER TO CHINA WHERE THE
GOVERNMENT SPENT WAY TOO MUCH
MONEY ON WHAT PEOPLE CALLED
GHOST CITIES, MAYBE THEY BUILT
WAY TOO MUCH INFRASTRUCTURE
AND APARTMENT BUILDINGS AND NOW
THAT BUBBLE IS BURGS.
IS THIS PART THREE OF THE SAME
BIG GIANT CRISIS THAT HAS BEEN
GOING ON FOR YEARS AND IT STILL
IS GOING TO PULL IT DOWN WITH
IT?
OR IS THIS REALLY A COMPLETELY
SEPARATE ISSUE AND REALLY THE
UNITED STATES HAS ALREADY GONE
THROUGH ITS CORRECTION AND WE'RE
IN MUCH BETTER SHAPE NOW.
AND CHINA WILL JUST HAVE TO SORT
IT OUT ON ITS OWN.
SO I HATE TO SAY THAT, YOU KNOW,
WE JUST DON'T KNOW BUT WE JUST
DON'T KNOW.
WE HAVE TO SEE HOW THIS PLAYS
OUT.
AND THERE IS AN ARGUMENT THAT IT
COULD BE VERY BAD FOR THE WHOLE
GLOBAL ECONOMY.
BUT THERE'S ALSO AN ARGUMENT
THAT CHINA'S STOCK MARKET IS
VERY SMALL AND PRIMITIVE.
IT'S NOT REALLY TIED IN WITH THE
REST OF THE WORLD.
YOU KNOW IN EUROPE AND THE
UNITED STATES, THE BANKS ARE BIG
AND ROBUST AND TIED TOGETHER AND
THEY INFLUENCE EACH OTHER.
CHINA IS KIND OF-- IT'S A BIG
MANUFACTURING ECONOMY BUT IT'S A
SMALL FINANCIAL POWER.
>> MARILYN GEEWAX SENIOR
BUSINESS EDITOR FOR NPR, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: ARCHAEOLOGISTS
WORKING FOR THE NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION,
OR N.O.A.A., HAVE MADE A
STARTLING DISCOVERY OFF THE
COAST OF ALASKA: WHALING SHIPS
THAT SANK NEARLY 145 YEARS AGO.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ZACHARY GREEN HAS
MORE.
>> Reporter: N.O.A.A.
ARCHAEOLOGISTS LAST WEEK FOUND
THE REMAINS OF TWO WHALING SHIPS
THAT SANK IN 1871.
THIS UNDERWATER FOOTAGE PROVIDES
AN UP CLOSE LOOK AT THE ANCHORS,
CHAINS, PLANKING, AND FRAMING IN
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE OLD
SHIPS.
THE ARCHAEOLOGISTS WERE ABLE TO
PINPOINT THE WRECKS NEAR THE
SHORES OF WAINWRIGHT, ON
ALASKA'S NORTH SLOPE.
THEIR SEARCH WAS ENABLED BY
SONAR TECHNOLOGY AND DIMINISHED
SEA ICE DUE TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
THE TWO WRECKS WERE PART OF A
WHALING FLEET THAT ENCOUNTERED
ICE FLOES THAT TORE INTO THEIR
HULLS, TRAPPING THEM AND TEARING
THEM APART.
IN ALL, 33 SHIPS SANK.
MORE THAN 1,200 MEN, WOMEN, AND
CHILDREN HAD BEEN ABOARD THE
FLEET.
NEARBY WHALING SHIPS RESCUED
THEM, DUMPING THEIR CARGO TO
MAKE ROOM.
THE DISASTER COST $33 MILLION IN
TODAY'S INFLATION-ADJUSTED
DOLLARS, CONTRIBUTING TO THE
WHALING INDUSTRY'S DECLINE.
THEIR DISCOVERY IS PART OF A
LARGER EFFORT BY N.O.A.A. TO
UNDERSTAND AMERICA'S WHALING
TRADE IN THE 1800'S.
ONCE A LUCRATIVE SOURCE OF OIL,
BY THE MID-19TH CENTURY, WHALE
POPULATIONS SHRANK DUE TO OVER-
HUNTING, AND WHALING CREWS BEGAN
SAILING FURTHER NORTH INTO THE
ARCTIC FOR NEW PREY.
THE CO-DIRECTOR OF N.O.A.A.'S
PROJECT SAYS THIS DISCOVERY WILL
HELP CLOSE AN IMPORTANT CHAPTER
IN AMERICAN MARITIME HISTORY.
JOIN THE PBS NEWSHOUR FOR LIVE
COVERAGE OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
FINAL STATE OF THE UNION
ADDRESS, FOLLOWED BY THE
REPUBLICAN RESPONSE.
WE'LL BE JOINED BY OUR OWN PANEL
OF POLITICAL EXPERTS FOR
ANALYSIS FROM BOTH SIDES OF THE
AISLE.
IT ALL STARTS TUESDAY JANUARY
12th AT 9:00 P.M., 8:00 CENTRAL
ON PBS.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY
TONIGHT, 53 YEAR OLD-- VOGEL HAS
SET A RECORD FOR LONG DISTANCE
CYCLING.
HE FINISHED A YEAR LONG RIDE
LAST NIGHT IN FLORIDA AFTER
BIKING 76,000 AND 76 MILES.
THE EQUIVALENT OF CIRCLING THE
EARTH THREE TIMES.
WEARING A GPS TRACKER ERODE AN
AVERAGE OF 208 MILES A DAY,
PEDALING 12 TO 14 HOURS THROUGH
EIGHT STATES AND WITH A SUPPORT
TEAM OF ONE, HIS WIFE.
HE BEAT THE RECORD SET BY A
BRITISH CYCLIST IN 1939 BY A
THOUSAND MILES.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW, AHEAD
OF COLLEGE FOOTBALL'S
CHAMPIONSHIP GAME, WE EXPLORE
THE HIT CONCUSSIONS TAKE ON
PLAYERS.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.